[THEME MUSIC]
>> I've been studying UFOs
a pretty long time now,
more than 25 years.
One of the first individuals
to really grab my attention
in this subject is someone
who's kind of forgotten
by most of the public,
most of the world
but he's very important
in this subject.
And his name is
Roscoe Hillenkoetter.
Roscoe Hillenkoetter
was a US Navy Admiral,
but he's probably most
well-known as the first
director of the CIA--
Central Intelligence
Agency-- in 1947
when that agency was created.
So he's an interesting person.
He ran the CIA
from 1947 to 1950.
When the Korean War
broke out that year,
he was replaced at
the CIA, probably
being blamed for not
getting enough intelligence
to warn on the impending
attack by the North Koreans.
Be that as it may,
that happens to people
in government service.
Hillenkoetter was there
for the first three
years of the CIA's existence
and he had a lot of prestige.
But here's the thing
about Hillenkoetter
that you never hear
historians talk about,
which is that this man
was deeply involved
in the UFO subject.
Like that's a fascinating
thing, that's an amazing thing.
First director of the
CIA was a board member
of the first and most
prominent civilian-based UFO
organization ever, really.
That organization
was called NICAP--
National Investigation
Committee on Aerial Phenomena.
It was founded in 1956,
and by early 1957,
NICAP was being run by Donald
Keyhoe, a retired Marine Corps
major who was really the
most prominent UFO journalist
in the world at that time.
And now, here's
Keyhoe directing NICAP
based out of Washington DC.
The whole point of NICAP as
under Keyhoe's leadership
was to try to achieve
disclosure of UFOs.
They didn't use that word
disclosure back then,
but that's really
what NICAP was about.
They also had a
really involved group
of civilian investigators.
They collected UFO reports.
They did all of
that, but there was
this very intensely
political element
to what NICAP was doing.
And it was all based on this
idea that was very, very
strongly held in
the 1950s, an idea
that citizens controlled
their government,
and that members of Congress
were the proper elected body
to work with to try to get
a UFO disclosure to happen.
Like that was a really wonderful
era in which citizens believed
that they could affect
their government's actions
and do all of this.
We look back on that
era and think, well,
it's nice that you thought that,
didn't really work that way.
But there was a strong belief,
it was a powerful belief
that Americans had in
their government back then.
So Keyhoe was running
NICAP, and on the board
was his classmate way back
in their days at Annapolis.
And that's Roscoe Hillenkoetter.
In other words, Keyhoe and
Hillenkoetter were friends.
And it just so happened
that Hillenkoetter
had been director of the
CIA a few years before that,
and Keyhoe gets Hillenkoetter
on the board of NICAP
in 1957 and for the
next five years.
When I first started
looking into that,
I thought, there must be
some scholarly monograph,
somewhere dealing with
Hillenkoetter's interest
in UFOs, and there is nothing.
This is just a big black
hole of scholarship.
Shame on the academic community
for letting this one slide by,
like asking the obvious
question why would this man
be so interested in UFOs?
Now, we've got
Keyhoe's various books
where he talks about
his interactions
with Hillenkoetter.
And it's quite
interesting because what
you see is that Hillenkoetter
was used frequently
by Keyhoe to help
promote the UFO cause,
you could say, vis-a-vis
members of Congress.
And Hillenkoetter seemed
quite willing to do that.
He was very supportive
of NICAP's efforts
to end UFO secrecy.
It's kind of an amazing thing.
This included a couple
of public statements
that Hillenkoetter made.
Aside from private encouragement
that he was constantly
giving to Keyhoe, advice,
and that sort of thing,
he made public
statements as well.
One was from February
27, 1960 where
he makes a public
statement about UFOs
which was then quoted
in the Sunday New York
Times the very next day.
I'm going to read this to you.
"It is time for the
truth to be brought out
in open congressional hearings.
Behind the scenes,
high-ranking Air Force officers
are soberly
concerned about UFOs.
But through official
secrecy and ridicule,
many citizens are led to
believe the unknown flying
objects are nonsense.
To hide the facts, the Air
Force has silenced its personnel
through the issuance
of a regulation."
That's a really
important statement
for such a prestigious
person to make,
and it was quoted within
the New York Times.
That's kind of amazing too when
you look at the history of how
the New York Times really
worked hand in glove with the US
government and the intelligence
community to dismiss UFOs
but they put in Hillenkoetter's
quote on this occasion.
So you've got, again,
a former director
of the CIA stating
that UFOs actually
are a serious matter
that the government was
trying to make the public
believe was nonsense.
What is going on with that?
And could you
imagine what it would
be like if we had
similarly today
a former CIA director
say the same thing?
I think it would be considered
a genuine bombshell for sure.
Well, things really heated up
for Keyhoe and Hillenkoetter
and NICAP through the year 1961.
And it's really
through 1961 into 1962
that matters come to a
climax, to a conclusion.
Throughout 1961, Keyhoe
and Hillenkoetter
are meeting with
members of Congress
privately to try to
open up the possibility
for genuine congressional
hearings on UFOs.
This had never happened before.
This is really going
to be a big deal
if they can make it happen.
They met with a man, congressman
named Overton Brooks who
seemed very sympathetic to
the whole idea of trying
to get these hearings happen.
And this is
something that Keyhoe
had tried for several
times previously,
and it had often looked like
they were going to succeed,
it could happen.
And then at the last
minute, the whole thing
just goes away
and didn't happen.
But on this occasion, they
got a little bit farther.
And it was during
this time that one
of Hillenkoetter's statements
again made it out to the media.
On August 22, 1961,
NICAP issued a statement
that was signed by
Hillenkoetter that
really brought this matter
to the public attention
once again.
The issue was always
NICAP felt, look,
these UFO sightings are a
matter of national security
if for no other reason than--
if the Air Force isn't
taking them seriously,
what if there's a UFO
sighting that they
mistake for a Soviet missile?
That could trigger World
War III accidentally.
And this was the kind
of thing that they
kept saying over and
over again to get
congressional attention
on UFOs and get
some kind of recognition.
In retrospect, when
I look back on this,
I think that's not really
necessarily the case.
I mean, just because the Air
Force says they don't take UFOs
seriously, doesn't
mean that they really
don't take UFOs seriously.
But from the public point
of view, they didn't.
And so this was NICAP's tactic
to Congress on August 22, 1961.
Acting with the majority of
the NICAP board of governors,
I urge immediate
congressional action
to reduce the
dangers from secrecy
about unidentified
flying objects.
Two dangers are
steadily increasing.
One, the risk of accidental war
from mistaking UFO formations
for a Soviet surprise attack.
And two, the danger that
the Soviet government may,
in a critical moment,
falsely claim the UFOs
as secret Russian
weapons against which
our defenses are helpless.
So again, the idea was we need
to have openness about UFOs
so that our military is on a
level of preparedness vis-a-vis
whatever it is the
Soviets are up to.
Again, I'm not sure that's
the strongest of argument
that you can make at the
time but it was their tactic.
And here, you have
Hillenkoetter putting himself
right out there, right out
there before the world,
talking about the need for
some transparency on the truly
real phenomenon of UFOs.
It's kind of an amazing thing.
Well, through the
fall of 1961 there
were ups and downs
in NICAP's attempts
to move this whole issue forward
for congressional hearings.
But it looked like
in early 1962,
that thing might just happen.
Keyhoe was able to meet with
Hillenkoetter personally
and it looked like
things were moving ahead,
everything was a go.
And then out of the
blue in February 1962,
Keyhoe gets a letter from his
friend Roscoe Hillenkoetter
saying just the opposite.
Hillenkoetter now is
saying, you know what,
this is really a bad idea.
I'm not going to participate
in these hearings.
I think the Air Force is doing
everything that they can do.
And as a matter of fact,
I'm resigning from the board
of NICAP effective immediately.
I think we need to just give
the Air Force a breathing space
and let them do their thing.
Keyhoe is absolutely floored.
He was stunned.
He tried to get an explanation
out of Hillenkoetter
but he wasn't able to.
And that really was the
end of their friendship.
That was the end
of their dealings
with each other in
a professional way
as far as anyone could see.
Keyhoe always
believed that someone
had gotten to Hillenkoetter
at the last minute,
threatened him with his career
or threatened with something,
and that that had worked.
And really, when you look at
the grand scheme of things,
the big picture of
what was going on
at that particular
time, I personally
think that that's the
best interpretation.
Hillenkoetter received
some professional pressure
from his associates
within the military,
within the
intelligence community
that made it very clear that
moving ahead on this matter
any further was a bad idea.
Don't do it.
And it looks like he
listened to that advice.
He did an exact 180
from where he had been.
And I mean, again, this is
just a very interesting story,
isn't it, where you've got
the first director of the CIA
with an obvious interest in
UFOs who, for five years,
is the most prominent
member of the most
prominent civilian organization
dealing with UFOs who makes
several public statements
about the reality of UFOs
and how there was an
intentional government program
to minimize it and make it
seem like nonsense, who talked
about the importance of bringing
this up openly within Congress,
and who, at the last
minute, before all of this
seemed ready to move forward,
bails out with no explanation.
Now, that's a story
for the archivists.
That's a story for intelligence
community historians
who really want to dig into
a juicy, interesting story
of our hidden history.
What we have right
now is every reason
to think that Roscoe
Hillenkoetter was
pressured into silence on UFOs.
You never thought, did you, that
a former director of the CIA
could go so far on this
issue in the public?
Well, that was a long time ago
and we've gone a long distance
since those days.
But I like to believe it
is not impossible for more
high-level government officials
to keep that tradition going
and to release
information that they know
relating to the UFO phenomenon.
Because honestly, it's one of
the best things that we can do,
is to get people who are in the
know to come out in the public
and talk about what they
have known to be the case.
Genuine verifiable
whistleblowers whose background
can be verified, whose
information can be checked,
and so forth.
That's what we need.
And Hillenkoetter was I think
one that we could consider
to be a whistleblower,
and one who
had a very important position
within the government
in this day.
Despite all the
failures of the past,
there's always room for victory.
There's always room
for more people
to step up and provide the
public with the information
that we need to hear.
[THEME MUSIC]